s2_organisation_and_version_control/dvc.md, before:

![Logo](../figures/icons/dvc.png){ align=right width="130"}

# Data Version Control

---

!!! info "Core Module"

In this module, we are going to return to version control. However, this time we are going to focus on version control
of data. The reason we need to separate between standard version control and data version control comes down to one
problem: size.

Classic version control was developed to keep track of code files, which all are simple text files. Even a codebase that
contains 1000+ files with millions of lines of code can probably be stored in less than a single gigabyte (GB). On the
other hand, the size of data can be drastically bigger. As most machine learning algorithms only get better with the
more data that you feed them, we are seeing models today that are being trained on petabytes of data (1.000.000 GB).

Because this is an important concept there exist a couple of frameworks that have specialized in versioning data such as
[DVC](https://dvc.org/), [DAGsHub](https://dagshub.com/), [Hub](https://www.activeloop.ai/),
[Modelstore](https://modelstore.readthedocs.io/en/latest/) and [ModelDB](https://github.com/VertaAI/modeldb/).
Regardless of what framework, they all implement somewhat the same concept: instead of storing the actual data files
or in general storing any large *artifacts* files we instead store a pointer to these large flies. We then version
control the point instead of the artifact.

<figure markdown>
![Image](../figures/git_artifact.png){ width="700" }
<figcaption>
<a href="https://madewithml.com/courses/mlops/versioning/"> Image credit </a>
</figcaption>
</figure>

We are in this course going to use `DVC` provided by [iterative.ai](https://iterative.ai/) as they also provide tools
for automatizing machine learning, which we are going to focus on later.

## DVC: What is it?

DVC (Data Version Control) is simply an extension of `git` to not only take versioning data but also models and
experiments in general. But how does it deal with these large data files? Essentially, `DVC` will just keep track of a
small *metafile* that will then point to some remote location where your original data is stored. Metafiles
essentially work as placeholders for your data files. Your large data files are then stored in some remote location such
as Google Drive or an `S3` bucket from Amazon.

<figure markdown>
  ![Image](../figures/dvc.png){ width="700" }
  <figcaption>
  <a href="https://www.analyticsvidhya.com/blog/2021/06/mlops-versioning-datasets-with-git-dvc/"> Image credit </a>
  </figcaption>
</figure>

As the figure shows, we now have two remote locations: one for code and one for data. We use `git pull/push` for the
code and `dvc pull/push` for the data. The key concept is the connection between the data file `model.pkl` which is
fairly large and its respective *metafile* `model.pkl.dvc` which is very small. The large file is stored in the data
remote and the metafile is stored in the code remote.

## ❔ Exercises

If in doubt about some of the exercises, we recommend checking out the [documentation for DVC](https://dvc.org/doc) as
it contains excellent tutorials.

1. For these exercises, we are going to use Google [drive](https://www.google.com/intl/da/drive/) as a remote storage
    solution for our data. If you do not already have a Google account, please create one (we are going to use it again
    in later exercises). Please make sure that you at least have 1GB of free space.

2. Next, install DVC and the Google Drive extension

    ```bash
    pip install dvc
    pip install dvc-gdrive
    ```

    If you installed DVC via pip and plan to use cloud services as remote storage, you might need to install these
    optional dependencies: [s3], [azure], [gdrive], [gs], [oss], [ssh]. Alternatively, use [all] to include them all.
    If you encounter that the installation fails, we recommend that you start by updating pip and then trying to
    update `dvc`:

    ```bash
    pip install -U pip
    pip install -U dvc-gdrive
    ```

    If this does not work for you, it is most likely due to a problem with `pygit2` and in that case we recommend that
    you follow the instructions [here](https://github.com/libgit2/pygit2/blob/master/docs/install.rst#advanced).

3. In your MNIST repository run the following command from the terminal

    ```bash
    dvc init
    ```

    this will setup `dvc` for this repository (similar to how `git init` will initialize a git repository).
    These files should be committed using standard `git` to your repository.

4. Go to your Google Drive and create a new folder called `dtu_mlops_data`. Then copy the unique identifier
    belonging to that folder as shown in the figure below

    <figure markdown>
    ![Image](../figures/google_drive.PNG){ width="1000" }
    </figure>

    Using this identifier, add it as a remote storage

    ```bash
    dvc remote add -d storage gdrive://<your_identifier>
    ```

5. Check the content of the file `.dvc/config`. Does it contain a pointer to your remote storage? Afterwards, make sure
    to add this file to the next commit we are going to make:

    ```bash
    git add .dvc/config
    ```

6. Call the `dvc add` command on your data files exactly like you would add a file with `git` (you do not need to
    add every file by itself as you can directly add the `data/` folder). Doing this should create a human-readable
    file with the extension `.dvc`. This is the *metafile* as explained earlier that will serve as a placeholder for
    your data. If you are on Windows and this step fails you may need to install `pywin32`. At the same time, the `data`
    folder should have been added to the `.gitignore` file that marks which files should not be tracked by git. Confirm
    that this is correct.

7. Now we are going to add, commit and tag the *metafiles* so we can restore to this stage later on. Commit and tag
    the files, which should look something like this:

    ```bash
    git add data.dvc .gitignore
    git commit -m "First datasets, containing 25000 images"
    git tag -a "v1.0" -m "data v1.0"
    ```

8. Finally, push your data to the remote storage using `dvc push`. You will be asked to authenticate, which involves
    copy-pasting the code in the link prompted. Check out your Google Drive folder. You will see that the data is not
    in a recognizable format anymore due to the way that `dvc` packs and tracks the data. The boring detail is that
    `dvc` converts the data into [content-addressable storage](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Content-addressable_storage)
    which makes data much faster to get. Finally, make sure that your data is not stored in your Github repository.

    After authenticating the first time, `DVC` should be setup without having to authenticate again. If you for some
    reason encounter that dvc fails to authenticate, you can try to reset the authentication. Locate the file
    `$CACHE_HOME/pydrive2fs/{gdrive_client_id}/default.json` where `$CACHE_HOME` depends on your operating system:

    === "macOS"
        ```~/Library/Caches```

    === "Linux"
        ```~/.cache``` <br>
        This is the typical location, but it may vary depending on what distro you are running

    === "Windows"
        ```{user}/AppData/Local```

    Delete the complete `{gdrive_client_id}` folder and retry authenticating with `dvc push`.

9. After completing the above steps, it is very easy for others (or yourself) to get setup with both
    code and data by simply running

    ```bash
    git clone <my_repository>
    cd <my_repository>
    dvc pull
    ```

    (assuming that you give them access right to the folder in your drive). Try doing this (in some other location
    than your standard code) to make sure that the two commands indeed download both your code and data.

10. Lets look about the process of updating our data. Remember the important aspect of version control is that we do not
    need to store explicit files called `data_v1.pt`, `data_v2.pt` etc. but just have a single `data.pt` that where we
    can always checkout earlier versions. Initially start by copying the data `data/corruptmnist_v2` folder from this
    repository to your MNIST code. This contains 3 extra datafiles with 15000 additional observations. Rerun your data
    pipeline so these gets incorporated into the files in your `processed` folder.

11. Redo the above steps, adding the new data using `dvc`, committing and tagging the metafiles e.g. the following
    commands should be executed (with appropriate input):

    `dvc add -> git add -> git commit -> git tag -> dvc push -> git push`.

12. Lets say that you wanted to go back to the state of your data in v1.0. If the above steps have been done correctly,
    you should be able to do this using:

    ```bash
    git checkout v1.0
    dvc checkout
    ```

    confirm that you have reverted to the original data.

13. (Optional) Finally, it is important to note that `dvc` is not only intended to be used to store data files but also
    any other large files such as trained model weights (with billions of parameters these can be quite large). For
    example, if we always store our best-performing model in a file called `best_model.ckpt` then we can use `dvc` to
    version control it, store it online and make it easy for others to download. Feel free to experiment with this using
    your model checkpoints.

In general `dvc` is a great framework for version-controlling data and models. However, it is important to note that it
does have some performance issue when dealing with datasets that consist of many files. Therefore, if you are ever
working with a dataset that consists of many small files, it can be a
[good idea to](https://fizzylogic.nl/2023/01/13/did-you-know-dvc-doesn-t-handle-large-datasets-neither-did-we-and-here-s-how-we-fixed-it):

* zip files into a single archive and then version control the archive. The `zip` archive should be placed in a
    `data/raw` folder and then unzipped in the `data/processed` folder.

* If possible turn your data into 1D arrays, then it can be stored in a single file such as `.parquet` or `.csv`.
    This is especially useful for tabular data. Then you can version control the single file instead of the many files.

## 🧠 Knowledge check

1. How do you know that a repository is using dvc?

    ??? success "Solution"

        Similar to a git repository having a `.git` directory, a repository using dvc needs to have a `.dvc` folder.
        Alternatively you can you the `dvc status` command.

2. Assume you just added a folder called `data/` that you want to track with `dvc`. What is the sequence of 5 commands
    to successful version control the folder? (assuming you already setup a remote)

    ??? success "Solution"

        ```bash
        dvc add data/
        git add .
        git commit -m "added raw data"
        git push
        dvc push
        ```

That's all for today. With the combined power of `git` and `dvc` we should be able to version control everything in
our development pipeline such that no changes are lost (assuming we commit regularly). It should be noted that `dvc`
offers more than just data version control, so if you want to deep dive into `dvc` we recommend their
[pipeline](https://dvc.org/doc/user-guide/project-structure/pipelines-files) feature and how this can be used to setup
version controlled [experiments](https://dvc.org/doc/command-reference/exp). Note that we are going to revisit `dvc`
later for a more permanent (and large-scale) storage solution.

Commit message:

Update project instructions (#296)
* smaller updates

* update project page

* update package manager

* update material

* github

* logging -> loguru

* fixes

* use typer instead of click

* click -> typer

* click -> typer

* update code structure to use new template

* update checklist

* update report template

s2_organisation_and_version_control/dvc.md, after:

![Logo](../figures/icons/dvc.png){ align=right width="130"}

# Data Version Control

---

!!! info "Core Module"

In this module, we are going to return to version control. However, this time we are going to focus on version control
of data. The reason we need to separate between standard version control and data version control comes down to one
problem: size.

Classic version control was developed to keep track of code files, which all are simple text files. Even a codebase that
contains 1000+ files with millions of lines of code can probably be stored in less than a single gigabyte (GB). On the
other hand, the size of data can be drastically bigger. As most machine learning algorithms only get better with the
more data that you feed them, we are seeing models today that are being trained on petabytes of data (1.000.000 GB).

Because this is an important concept there exist a couple of frameworks that have specialized in versioning data such as
[DVC](https://dvc.org/), [DAGsHub](https://dagshub.com/), [Hub](https://www.activeloop.ai/),
[Modelstore](https://modelstore.readthedocs.io/en/latest/) and [ModelDB](https://github.com/VertaAI/modeldb/).
Regardless of what framework, they all implement somewhat the same concept: instead of storing the actual data files
or in general storing any large *artifacts* files we instead store a pointer to these large flies. We then version
control the point instead of the artifact.

<figure markdown>
![Image](../figures/git_artifact.png){ width="700" }
<figcaption>
<a href="https://madewithml.com/courses/mlops/versioning/"> Image credit </a>
</figcaption>
</figure>

We are in this course going to use `DVC` provided by [iterative.ai](https://iterative.ai/) as they also provide tools
for automatizing machine learning, which we are going to focus on later.

## DVC: What is it?

DVC (Data Version Control) is simply an extension of `git` to not only take versioning data but also models and
experiments in general. But how does it deal with these large data files? Essentially, `DVC` will just keep track of a
small *metafile* that will then point to some remote location where your original data is stored. Metafiles
essentially work as placeholders for your data files. Your large data files are then stored in some remote location such
as Google Drive or a `S3` bucket from Amazon.

<figure markdown>
  ![Image](../figures/dvc.png){ width="700" }
  <figcaption>
  <a href="https://www.analyticsvidhya.com/blog/2021/06/mlops-versioning-datasets-with-git-dvc/"> Image credit </a>
  </figcaption>
</figure>

As the figure shows, we now have two remote locations: one for code and one for data. We use `git pull/push` for the
code and `dvc pull/push` for the data. The key concept is the connection between the data file `model.pkl` which is
fairly large and its respective *metafile* `model.pkl.dvc` which is very small. The large file is stored in the data
remote and the metafile is stored in the code remote.

## ❔ Exercises

If in doubt about some exercises, we recommend checking out the [documentation for DVC](https://dvc.org/doc) as
it contains excellent tutorials.

1. For these exercises, we are going to use [Google Drive](https://www.google.com/intl/da/drive/) as a remote storage
    solution for our data. If you do not already have a Google account, please create one (we are going to use it again
    in later exercises). Please make sure that you at least have 1 GB of free space.

2. Next, install DVC and the Google Drive extension

    ```bash
    pip install dvc
    pip install dvc-gdrive
    ```

    If you installed DVC via pip and plan to use cloud services as remote storage, you might need to install these
    optional dependencies: `[s3]`, `[azure]`, `[gdrive]`, `[gs]`, `[oss]`, `[ssh]`. Alternatively, use `[all]` to
    include them all. If you encounter that the installation fails, we recommend that you start by updating pip and then
    trying to update `dvc`:

    ```bash
    pip install -U pip
    pip install -U dvc-gdrive
    ```

    If this does not work for you, it is most likely due to a problem with `pygit2` and in that case we recommend that
    you follow the instructions [here](https://github.com/libgit2/pygit2/blob/master/docs/install.rst#advanced).

3. In your MNIST repository run the following command from the terminal

    ```bash
    dvc init
    ```

    This will set up `dvc` for this repository (similar to how `git init` will initialize a git repository).
    These files should be committed using standard `git` to your repository.

4. Go to your Google Drive and create a new folder called `dtu_mlops_data`. Then copy the unique identifier
    belonging to that folder as shown in the figure below

    <figure markdown>
    ![Image](../figures/google_drive.PNG){ width="1000" }
    </figure>

    Using this identifier, add it as a remote storage

    ```bash
    dvc remote add -d storage gdrive://<your_identifier>
    ```

5. Check the content of the file `.dvc/config`. Does it contain a pointer to your remote storage? Afterwards, make sure
    to add this file to the next commit we are going to make:

    ```bash
    git add .dvc/config
    ```

6. Call the `dvc add` command on your data files exactly like you would add a file with `git` (you do not need to
    add every file by itself as you can directly add the `data/` folder). Doing this should create a human-readable
    file with the extension `.dvc`. This is the *metafile* as explained earlier that will serve as a placeholder for
    your data. If you are on Windows and this step fails you may need to install `pywin32`. At the same time, the `data`
    folder should have been added to the `.gitignore` file that marks which files should not be tracked by git. Confirm
    that this is correct.

7. Now we are going to add, commit and tag the *metafiles*, so we can restore to this stage later on. Commit and tag
    the files, which should look something like this:

    ```bash
    git add data.dvc .gitignore
    git commit -m "First datasets, containing 25000 images"
    git tag -a "v1.0" -m "data v1.0"
    ```

8. Finally, push your data to the remote storage using `dvc push`. You will be asked to authenticate, which involves
    copy-pasting the code in the link prompted. Check out your Google Drive folder. You will see that the data is not
    in a recognizable format anymore due to the way that `dvc` packs and tracks the data. The boring detail is that
    `dvc` converts the data into [content-addressable storage](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Content-addressable_storage)
    which makes data much faster to get. Finally, make sure that your data is not stored in your GitHub repository.

    After authenticating the first time, DVC should be setup without having to authenticate again. If you for some
    reason encounter that DVC fails to authenticate, you can try to reset the authentication. Locate the file
    `$CACHE_HOME/pydrive2fs/{gdrive_client_id}/default.json` where `$CACHE_HOME` depends on your operating system:

    === "macOS"
        ```~/Library/Caches```

    === "Linux"
        ```~/.cache``` <br>
        This is the typical location, but it may vary depending on what distro you are running

    === "Windows"
        ```{user}/AppData/Local```

    Delete the complete `{gdrive_client_id}` folder and retry authenticating with `dvc push`.

9. After completing the above steps, it is very easy for others (or yourself) to get setup with both
    code and data by simply running

    ```bash
    git clone <my_repository>
    cd <my_repository>
    dvc pull
    ```

    (assuming that you give them access right to the folder in your drive). Try doing this (in some other location
    than your standard code) to make sure that the two commands indeed download both your code and data.

10. Let's look about the process of updating our data. Remember the important aspect of version control is that we do
    not need to store explicit files called `data_v1.pt`, `data_v2.pt` etc. but just have a single `data.pt` that where
    we can always check out earlier versions. Initially start by copying the data `data/corruptmnist_v2` folder from
    this repository to your MNIST code. This contains 3 extra data files with 15000 additional observations. Rerun your
    data pipeline so these gets incorporated into the files in your `processed` folder.

11. Redo the above steps, adding the new data using `dvc`, committing and tagging the metafiles e.g. the following
    commands should be executed (with appropriate input):

    `dvc add -> git add -> git commit -> git tag -> dvc push -> git push`.

12. Let's say that you wanted to go back to the state of your data in v1.0. If the above steps have been done correctly,
    you should be able to do this using:

    ```bash
    git checkout v1.0
    dvc checkout
    ```

    Confirm that you have reverted to the original data.

13. (Optional) Finally, it is important to note that `dvc` is not only intended to be used to store data files but also
    any other large files such as trained model weights (with billions of parameters these can be quite large). For
    example, if we always store our best-performing model in a file called `best_model.ckpt` then we can use `dvc` to
    version control it, store it online and make it easy for others to download. Feel free to experiment with this using
    your model checkpoints.

In general `dvc` is a great framework for version-controlling data and models. However, it is important to note that it
does have some performance issue when dealing with datasets that consist of many files. Therefore, if you are ever
working with a dataset that consists of many small files, it can be a
[good idea to](https://fizzylogic.nl/2023/01/13/did-you-know-dvc-doesn-t-handle-large-datasets-neither-did-we-and-here-s-how-we-fixed-it):

* Zip files into a single archive and then version control the archive. The `zip` archive should be placed in a
    `data/raw` folder and then unzipped in the `data/processed` folder.

* If possible turn your data into 1D arrays, then it can be stored in a single file such as `.parquet` or `.csv`.
    This is especially useful for tabular data. Then you can version control the single file instead of the many files.

## 🧠 Knowledge check

1. How do you know that a repository is using dvc?

    ??? success "Solution"

        Similar to a git repository having a `.git` directory, a repository using dvc needs to have a `.dvc` folder.
        Alternatively you can you the `dvc status` command.

2. Assume you just added a folder called `data/` that you want to track with `dvc`. What is the sequence of 5 commands
    to successful version control the folder? (assuming you already setup a remote)

    ??? success "Solution"

        ```bash
        dvc add data/
        git add .
        git commit -m "added raw data"
        git push
        dvc push
        ```

That's all for today. With the combined power of `git` and `dvc` we should be able to version control everything in
our development pipeline such that no changes are lost (assuming we commit regularly). It should be noted that `dvc`
offers more than just data version control, so if you want to deep dive into `dvc` we recommend their
[pipeline](https://dvc.org/doc/user-guide/project-structure/pipelines-files) feature and how this can be used to setup
version controlled [experiments](https://dvc.org/doc/command-reference/exp). Note that we are going to revisit `dvc`
later for a more permanent (and large-scale) storage solution.
