s1_development_environment/editor.md, before:

![Logo](../figures/icons/vscode.png){ align=right width="130"}

# Editor/IDE

---

!!! info "Core Module"

Notebooks can be great for testing out ideas, developing simple code and explaining and visualizing certain aspects
of a codebase. Remember that [Jupyter notebook](https://jupyter.org/) was created with intention to "...allows you
to create and share documents that contain live code, equations, visualizations and narrative text." However,
any larger machine learning project will require you to work in multiple `.py` files and here notebooks will provide
a suboptimal workflow. Therefore, to for truly getting "work done" you will need a good editor / IDE.

Many opinions exist on this matter, but for simplicity we recommend getting started with one of the following 3:

| Editor             | Webpage                              | Comment (Biased opinion)                                              |
| ------------------ | ------------------------------------ | --------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Spyder             | <https://www.spyder-ide.org/>        | Matlab like environment that is easy to get started with              |
| Visual studio code | <https://code.visualstudio.com/>     | Support for multiple languages with fairly easy setup                 |
| PyCharm            | <https://www.jetbrains.com/pycharm/> | IDE for python professionals. Will take a bit of time getting used to |

We highly recommend Visual studio (vs) code if you do not already have a editor installed
(or just want to try something new.). We therefore put additional effort into explaining vs code.

Below you see an overview of the vs code interface

<figure markdown>
![Image](../figures/vscode.PNG){ width="700" }
<figcaption> <a href=" https://www.git-tower.com/learn/cheat-sheets/vscode/"> Image credit </a> </figcaption>
</figure>

The main components of VS code are:

* The action bar: VS code is not an editor meant for a single language and can do many things. One of the core reasons
    that VS code have become so popular is that custom plug-ins called **extensions** can be installed to add
    functionality to VS code. It is in the action bar that you can navigate between these different applications
    when you have installed them.

* The side bar: The side bar has different functionality depending on what extension that you have open.
    In most cases, the side bar will just contain the file explorer.

* The editor: This where you code is. VS code supports a number of layouts in the editor (one column, two column etc.).
    You can make a custom layout by dragging a file to where you want the layout to split.

* The panel: The panel contains a terminal for you to interact with. This can quickly be used to try out code by
    opening a `python` interpreter, management of environments etc.

* The status bar: The status bar contains information based on the extensions that you have installed. In particular
    for python development, the status bar can be used to change conda environment.

## ❔ Exercises

Start by downloading and install one of the editors / IDE and make yourself familiar with it e.g. try out the editor
on the files that you created in the final exercise in the last lecture.

The remaining of the exercises are specific to Visual studio code but we recommend that you try to answer the questions
if using another editor. In the `exercise_files` folder belonging to this session we have put cheat sheets for vs code
(one for Windows and one for Mac/Linux), that can give you an easy overview of the different macros in vs code. The
following exercises are just to get you started but you can find many more tutorials
[here](https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/python/python-tutorial).

1. VS code is a general editor for many languages and to get proper *python* support we need to install some
    extensions. In the `action bar` go to the `extension` tap and search for `python` in the marketplace. For here
    we highly recommend installing the following packages:

    * `Python`: general python support
    * `Python Test Explorer for Visual Studio Code`: support for testing of python code (we get to that in a later lecture)
    * `Jupyter`: support for jupyter notebooks directly in VSCode

2. If you install the `Python` package you should see something like this in your status bar:

    <figure markdown>
    ![Image](../figures/action_bar.PNG){ width="700" }
    </figure>

    which indicates that you are using the stock python installation, instead of the one you have created using `conda`.
    Click it and change the python environment to the one you actually want to use.

3. One of the most useful tools in VSCode is the ability to navigate a hole project using the built-in
    `Explorer`. To really take advantage of the VS code you need to make sure what you are working on is a project.
    Create a folder called `hello` (somewhere on your laptop) and open it in VScode (Click `File` in the menu and then
    select `Open Folder`). You should end up with a completely clean workspace (as shown below). Click the `New file`
    button and create a file called `hello.py`.

    <figure markdown>
    ![Image](../figures/toolbar_new_file.png){ width="700" }
    <figcaption> <a href="https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/python/python-tutorial"> Image credit </a> </figcaption>
    </figure>

4. Finally, lets run some code. Add something simple to the `hello.py` file like:

    <figure markdown>
    ![Image](../figures/run_python_file.png){ width="700" }
    <figcaption> <a href="https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/python/python-tutorial"> Image credit </a> </figcaption>
    </figure>

    and click the `run` button as shown in the image. It should create a new terminal, activate the environment that you
    have chosen and finally run your script. In addition to clicking the `run` button, you can also

    * Select some code and press `Shift+Enter` to run it in the terminal
    * Select some code and right click, choosing to run in a interactive window (where you can interact with the results
        like in a jupyter notebook)

That's, the basic of using VScode. We recommend highly that you revisit
[this tutorial](https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/python/python-tutorial) during the course when we get to topics such
as debugging and version control which VScode can help with.

## A note on jupyter notebooks in production environments

As already stated jupyter notebooks are great for development as they allow developers to easily test our new ideas.
However, they often lead to pain points when models actually needs to be deployed. We highly recommend reading section
5.1.1 of [this paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2209.09125) by Shankar et al. that in more detail discuss the strong
opinions to jupyter notebooks that exist within the developer community.

All this said there at least exist one simple tool to make notebooks work better in a production setting. Its called
`nbconvert` and can be installed with

```bash
conda install nbconvert # or pip install nbconvert
```

You may need some further dependencies such as Pandoc, TeX and Pyppeteer for it to work (see install
instructions [here](https://nbconvert.readthedocs.io/en/latest/install.html#installing-nbconvert)).
After this, converting a notebook to a `.py` script is a simple as:

```bash
jupyter nbconvert --to=script my_notebook.ipynb
```

which will produce a similar named script called `my_notebook.py`. We highly recommend that you stick to developing
scripts directly during the course to get experience with doing so, but `nbconvert` can be an fantastic tool to have
in your toolbox.

Commit message:

Update conda module to be more general (#190)
* add learning objectives

* change name from conda to package manager

* change data

* smaller changes to modules

* update conda module to be more general

* change final exercise module

* fix broken external link

s1_development_environment/editor.md, after:

![Logo](../figures/icons/vscode.png){ align=right width="130"}

# Editor/IDE

---

!!! info "Core Module"

Notebooks can be great for testing out ideas, developing simple code and explaining and visualizing certain aspects
of a codebase. Remember that [Jupyter notebook](https://jupyter.org/) was created with intention to "...allows you
to create and share documents that contain live code, equations, visualizations and narrative text." However,
any larger machine learning project will require you to work in multiple `.py` files and here notebooks will provide
a suboptimal workflow. Therefore, to for truly getting "work done" you will need a good editor / IDE.

Many opinions exist on this matter, but for simplicity we recommend getting started with one of the following 3:

| Editor             | Webpage                              | Comment (Biased opinion)                                              |
| ------------------ | ------------------------------------ | --------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Spyder             | <https://www.spyder-ide.org/>        | Matlab like environment that is easy to get started with              |
| Visual studio code | <https://code.visualstudio.com/>     | Support for multiple languages with fairly easy setup                 |
| PyCharm            | <https://www.jetbrains.com/pycharm/> | IDE for python professionals. Will take a bit of time getting used to |

We highly recommend Visual studio (VS) code if you do not already have a editor installed (or just want to try
something new.). We therefore put additional effort into explaining VS code.

Below you see an overview of the vs code interface

<figure markdown>
![Image](../figures/vscode.PNG){ width="700" }
<figcaption> <a href=" https://www.git-tower.com/learn/cheat-sheets/vscode/"> Image credit </a> </figcaption>
</figure>

The main components of VS code are:

* The action bar: VS code is not an editor meant for a single language and can do many things. One of the core reasons
    that VS code have become so popular is that custom plug-ins called *extensions* can be installed to add
    functionality to VS code. It is in the action bar that you can navigate between these different applications
    when you have installed them.

* The side bar: The side bar has different functionality depending on what extension that you have open.
    In most cases, the side bar will just contain the file explorer.

* The editor: This where you code is. VS code supports a number of layouts in the editor (one column, two column etc.).
    You can make a custom layout by dragging a file to where you want the layout to split.

* The panel: The panel contains a terminal for you to interact with. This can quickly be used to try out code by
    opening a `python` interpreter, management of environments etc.

* The status bar: The status bar contains information based on the extensions that you have installed. In particular
    for python development, the status bar can be used to change conda environment.

## ❔ Exercises

The overall goal of the exercises, is that you should start familiarizing yourself with the editor that you have
chosen. If you are already an expert in one of them, feel free to skip the rest. You should at least be able to:

* Create a new file
* Run a python script
* Change the python environment

The instructions below are specific to Visual studio code but we recommend that you try to answer the questions
if using another editor. In the `exercise_files` folder belonging to this session we have put cheat sheets for VS code
(one for Windows and one for Mac/Linux), that can give you an easy overview of the different macros in VS code. The
following exercises are just to get you started but you can find many more tutorials
[here](https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/python/python-tutorial).

1. VS code is a general editor for many languages and to get proper *python* support we need to install some
    extensions. In the `action bar` go to the `extension` tap and search for `python` in the marketplace. For here
    we highly recommend installing the following packages:

    * [Python](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=ms-python.python): general python support for VS code
    * [Pylance](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=ms-python.vscode-pylance): language server for
        python that provides better code completion and type checking
    * [Jupyter](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=ms-toolsai.jupyter): support for jupyter notebooks
        directly in VSCode
    * [Python Environment Manager](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=donjayamanne.python-environment-manager):
        allows for easy management of virtual environments

2. If you install the `Python` package you should see something like this in your status bar:

    <figure markdown>
    ![Image](../figures/action_bar.PNG){ width="700" }
    </figure>

    which indicates that you are using the stock python installation, instead of the one you have created using `conda`.
    Click it and change the python environment to the one you actually want to use.

3. One of the most useful tools in VS Code is the ability to navigate a hole project using the built-in
    `Explorer`. To really take advantage of the VS code you need to make sure what you are working on is a project.
    Create a folder called `hello` (somewhere on your laptop) and open it in VS Code (Click `File` in the menu and then
    select `Open Folder`). You should end up with a completely clean workspace (as shown below). Click the `New file`
    button and create a file called `hello.py`.

    <figure markdown>
    ![Image](../figures/toolbar_new_file.png){ width="700" }
    <figcaption> <a href="https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/python/python-tutorial"> Image credit </a> </figcaption>
    </figure>

4. Finally, lets run some code. Add something simple to the `hello.py` file like:

    <figure markdown>
    ![Image](../figures/run_python_file.png){ width="700" }
    <figcaption> <a href="https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/python/python-tutorial"> Image credit </a> </figcaption>
    </figure>

    and click the `run` button as shown in the image. It should create a new terminal, activate the environment that you
    have chosen and finally run your script. In addition to clicking the `run` button, you can also

    * Select some code and press `Shift+Enter` to run it in the terminal
    * Select some code and right click, choosing to run in a interactive window (where you can interact with the results
        like in a jupyter notebook)

That's, the basic of using VS code. We recommend highly that you revisit
[this tutorial](https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/python/python-tutorial) during the course when we get to topics such
as debugging and version control which VS code can help with.

## A note on jupyter notebooks in production environments

As already stated jupyter notebooks are great for development as they allow developers to easily test our new ideas.
However, they often lead to pain points when models actually needs to be deployed. We highly recommend reading section
5.1.1 of [this paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2209.09125) by Shankar et al. that in more detail discuss the strong
opinions to jupyter notebooks that exist within the developer community.

All this said there at least exist one simple tool to make notebooks work better in a production setting. Its called
`nbconvert` and can be installed with

```bash
conda install nbconvert # or pip install nbconvert
```

You may need some further dependencies such as Pandoc, TeX and Pyppeteer for it to work (see install instructions
[here](https://nbconvert.readthedocs.io/en/latest/install.html#installing-nbconvert)). After this, converting a
notebook to a `.py` script is a simple as:

```bash
jupyter nbconvert --to=script my_notebook.ipynb
```

which will produce a similar named script called `my_notebook.py`. We highly recommend that you stick to developing
scripts directly during the course to get experience with doing so, but `nbconvert` can be an fantastic tool to have
in your toolbox.
