s9_scalable_applications/data_loading.md, before:


![Logo](../figures/icons/pytorch.png){ align=right width="130"}

# Distributed Data Loading

---

!!! info "Core Module"

One way that deep learning fundamentally changed the way we think about data in machine learning is that *more data is
always better*. This was very much not the case with more traditional machine learning algorithms (random forest,
support vector machines etc.) where a plateau in performance was often reached for a certain amount of data and did not
improve if more was added. However, as deep learning models have become deeper and deeper and thereby more and more
data-hungry performance seems to be ever increasing or at least not reaching a plateau in the same way as for
traditional machine learning.

<figure markdown>
![Image](../figures/ml_data.png){ width="500" }
<figcaption>
<a href="https://www.codesofinterest.com/2017/04/how-deep-should-deep-learning-be.html"> Image credit </a>
</figcaption>
</figure>

As we are trying to feed more and more data into our models, the obvious first question to ask is how to do this
efficiently. As a general rule of thumb, we want the performance bottleneck to be the forward/backward e.g. the
actual computation in our neural network and not the data loading. By bottleneck, we here refer to the part of our
pipeline that is restricting how fast we can process data. If data loading is our bottleneck, then our compute device
can sit idle while waiting for data to arrive, which is both inefficient and costly. For example, if you are using a
cloud provider for training deep learning models, you are paying by the hour per device, and thus not using them fully
can be costly in the long run.

In the first set of exercises, we are therefore going to focus on distributed data loading i.e. how to load data in
parallel to make sure that we always have data ready for our compute devices. We are in the following going to look
at what is going on behind the scenes when we use Pytorch to parallelize data loading.

## A closer look at Data loading

Before we talk distributed applications it is important to understand the physical layout of a standard CPU (the
brain of your computer).

<figure markdown>
![Image](../figures/cpu_layout.PNG){ width="500" }
</figure>

Most modern CPUs is a single chip that consists of multiple *cores*. Each core can further be divided into *threads*.
In most laptops, the core count is 4 and commonly 2 threads per code. This means that the common laptop has 8 threads.
The number of threads a compute unit has is important because that directly corresponds to the number of parallel
operations that can be executed i.e. one per thread. In a Python terminal you should be able to get the number of
cores in your machine by writing (try it):

```python
import multiprocessing
cores = multiprocessing.cpu_count()
print(f"Number of cores: {cores}, Number of threads: {2*cores}")
```

A distributed application is in general any kind of application that parallelizes some or all of its workload. We are
in these exercises only focusing on distributed data loading, which happens primarily only on the CPU. In `Pytorch` it
is easy to parallelize data loading if you are using their dataset/data loader interface:

```python
from torch.utils.data import Dataset, DataLoader
class MyDataset(Dataset):
    def __init__(self, ...):
        # whatever logic is needed to init the data set
        self.data = ...

    def __getitem__(self, idx):
        # return one item
        return self.data[idx]

dataset = MyDataset()
dataloader = Dataloader(
    dataset,
    batch_size=8,
    num_workers=4  # this is the number of threads we want to parallelize workload over
)
```

Let's take a deep dive into what happens when we request a batch from our dataloader e.g. ``next(dataloader)``. First,
we must understand that we have a thread that plays the role of the *main* and the remaining threads (in the above
example we request 4) are called *workers*. When the dataloader is created, we create this structure and make sure that
all threads have a copy of our dataset definition so each can call the `__getitem__` method.

<figure markdown>
![Image](../figures/cpu_data_loading1.PNG){ width="500" }
</figure>

Then comes the actual part where we request a batch of data. Assume that we have a batch size of 8 and we do not do
any shuffling. In this step, the master thread then distributes the list of requested data points (`[0,1,2,3,4,5,6,7]`)
to the four worker threads. With 8 indices and 4 workers, each worker will receive 2 indices.

<figure markdown>
![Image](../figures/cpu_data_loading2.PNG){ width="500" }
</figure>

Each worker thread then calls the `__getitem__` method for all the indices it has received. When all processes are done,
the loaded images data points gets sent back to the master thread and collected into a single structure/tensor.

<figure markdown>
![Image](../figures/cpu_data_loading3.PNG){ width="500" }
</figure>

Each arrow is corresponds to a communication between two threads, which is not a free operation. In total to get a
single batch (not counting the initial startup cost) in this example we need to do 8 communication operations. This may
seem like a small price to pay, but that may not be the case. If the processing time of ``__getitem__`` is very low (
data is stored in memory, we just need to index to get it) then it does not make sense to use multiprocessing. The
computational savings by doing the look-up operations in parallel are smaller than the communication cost there is
between the main thread and the workers. Multiprocessing makes sense when the processing time of ``__getitem__`` is high
(data is probably stored on the hard drive).

It is this trade-off that we are going to investigate in the exercises.

### ❔ Exercises

This exercise is intended to be done on the
[labeled faces in the wild (LFW)](http://vis-www.cs.umass.edu/lfw/) dataset. The dataset consists of images of famous
people extracted from the internet. The dataset had been used to drive the field of facial verification, which you can
read more about [here](https://viso.ai/deep-learning/deep-face-recognition/). We are going to imagine that this dataset
cannot fit in memory, and your job is therefore to construct a data pipeline that can be parallelized based on loading
the raw data files (.jpg) at runtime.

1. Download the dataset and extract it to a folder. It does not matter if you choose the non-aligned or aligned version
    of the dataset.

2. We provide the `lfw_dataset.py` file where we have started the process of defining a data class. Fill out the
    `__init__`, `__len__` and `__getitem__`. Note that `__getitem__` expects that you return a single `img` which should
    be a `torch.Tensor`. Loading should be done using [PIL Image](https://pillow.readthedocs.io/en/stable/), as `PIL`
    images are the default input format for [torchvision](https://pytorch.org/vision/stable/transforms.html) for
    transforms (for data augmentation).

3. Make sure that the script runs without any additional arguments

    ```bash
    python lfw_dataset.py
    ```

4. Visualize a single batch by filling out the codeblock after the first *TODO* right after defining the dataloader.
    The visualization should show when launching the script as

    ```bash
    python lfw_dataset.py -visualize_batch
    ```

    Hint: this [tutorial](https://pytorch.org/vision/stable/auto_examples/others/plot_visualization_utils.html).

5. Experiment how the number of workers influences the performance. We have already provide code that will pass over 100
    batches from the dataset 5 times and calculate how long time it took, which you can play around with by calling

    ```bash
    python lfw_dataset.py -get_timing -num_workers 1
    ```

    Make a [errorbar plot](https://matplotlib.org/stable/api/_as_gen/matplotlib.pyplot.errorbar.html) with number of
    workers along the x-axis and the timing along the y-axis. The errorbars should correspond to the standard deviation
    over the 5 runs. HINT: if it is taking too long to evaluate, measure the time over less batches (set the
    `-batches_to_check` flag). Also if you are not seeing an improvement, try increasing the batch size (since data
    loading is parallelized per batch).

    For certain machines like the Mac with M1 chipset it is necessary to set the `multiprocessing_context` flag in the
    dataloder to `"fork"`. This essentially tells the dataloader how the worker nodes should be created.

6. Retry the experiment where you change the data augmentation to be more complex:

    ```python
    lfw_trans = transforms.Compose([
        transforms.RandomAffine(5, (0.1, 0.1), (0.5, 2.0)),
        # add more transforms here
        transforms.ToTensor()
    ])
    ```

    by making the augmentation more computationally demanding, it should be easier to get a boost in performance when
    using multiple workers because the data augmentation is also executed in parallel.

7. (Optional, requires access to GPU) If your dataset fits in GPU memory it is beneficial to set the `pin_memory` flag
    to `True`. By setting this flag we are essentially telling Pytorch that they can lock the data in place in memory
    which will make the transfer between the *host* (CPU) and the *device* (GPU) faster.

This ends the module on distributed data loading in Pytorch. If you want to go into more details we highly recommend
that you read [this paper](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2211.04908.pdf) that goes into great detail on analyzing how data
loading in Pytorch works and performance benchmarks.

Commit message:

Finish ML deployment module (#280)
* move files

* delete local deployment module + fix readme

* fix numbering

* move exercise files

* fix cross link

* include nice table in intro

* correct PyTorch spelling in documentation and comments

* getting started on the bento stuff

* Pre-commit fixes

* update with some images

* first bento exercise finished

* exercise on adaptive batching

* more exercises

* finish module

* fix links

---------

Co-authored-by: SkafteNicki <SkafteNicki@users.noreply.github.com>

s9_scalable_applications/data_loading.md, after:


![Logo](../figures/icons/pytorch.png){ align=right width="130"}

# Distributed Data Loading

---

!!! info "Core Module"

One way that deep learning fundamentally changed the way we think about data in machine learning is that *more data is
always better*. This was very much not the case with more traditional machine learning algorithms (random forest,
support vector machines etc.) where a plateau in performance was often reached for a certain amount of data and did not
improve if more was added. However, as deep learning models have become deeper and deeper and thereby more and more
data-hungry performance seems to be ever increasing or at least not reaching a plateau in the same way as for
traditional machine learning.

<figure markdown>
![Image](../figures/ml_data.png){ width="500" }
<figcaption>
<a href="https://www.codesofinterest.com/2017/04/how-deep-should-deep-learning-be.html"> Image credit </a>
</figcaption>
</figure>

As we are trying to feed more and more data into our models, the obvious first question to ask is how to do this
efficiently. As a general rule of thumb, we want the performance bottleneck to be the forward/backward e.g. the
actual computation in our neural network and not the data loading. By bottleneck, we here refer to the part of our
pipeline that is restricting how fast we can process data. If data loading is our bottleneck, then our compute device
can sit idle while waiting for data to arrive, which is both inefficient and costly. For example, if you are using a
cloud provider for training deep learning models, you are paying by the hour per device, and thus not using them fully
can be costly in the long run.

In the first set of exercises, we are therefore going to focus on distributed data loading i.e. how to load data in
parallel to make sure that we always have data ready for our compute devices. We are in the following going to look
at what is going on behind the scenes when we use PyTorch to parallelize data loading.

## A closer look at Data loading

Before we talk distributed applications it is important to understand the physical layout of a standard CPU (the
brain of your computer).

<figure markdown>
![Image](../figures/cpu_layout.PNG){ width="500" }
</figure>

Most modern CPUs is a single chip that consists of multiple *cores*. Each core can further be divided into *threads*.
In most laptops, the core count is 4 and commonly 2 threads per code. This means that the common laptop has 8 threads.
The number of threads a compute unit has is important because that directly corresponds to the number of parallel
operations that can be executed i.e. one per thread. In a Python terminal you should be able to get the number of
cores in your machine by writing (try it):

```python
import multiprocessing
cores = multiprocessing.cpu_count()
print(f"Number of cores: {cores}, Number of threads: {2*cores}")
```

A distributed application is in general any kind of application that parallelizes some or all of its workload. We are
in these exercises only focusing on distributed data loading, which happens primarily only on the CPU. In `PyTorch` it
is easy to parallelize data loading if you are using their dataset/data loader interface:

```python
from torch.utils.data import Dataset, DataLoader
class MyDataset(Dataset):
    def __init__(self, ...):
        # whatever logic is needed to init the data set
        self.data = ...

    def __getitem__(self, idx):
        # return one item
        return self.data[idx]

dataset = MyDataset()
dataloader = Dataloader(
    dataset,
    batch_size=8,
    num_workers=4  # this is the number of threads we want to parallelize workload over
)
```

Let's take a deep dive into what happens when we request a batch from our dataloader e.g. ``next(dataloader)``. First,
we must understand that we have a thread that plays the role of the *main* and the remaining threads (in the above
example we request 4) are called *workers*. When the dataloader is created, we create this structure and make sure that
all threads have a copy of our dataset definition so each can call the `__getitem__` method.

<figure markdown>
![Image](../figures/cpu_data_loading1.PNG){ width="500" }
</figure>

Then comes the actual part where we request a batch of data. Assume that we have a batch size of 8 and we do not do
any shuffling. In this step, the master thread then distributes the list of requested data points (`[0,1,2,3,4,5,6,7]`)
to the four worker threads. With 8 indices and 4 workers, each worker will receive 2 indices.

<figure markdown>
![Image](../figures/cpu_data_loading2.PNG){ width="500" }
</figure>

Each worker thread then calls the `__getitem__` method for all the indices it has received. When all processes are done,
the loaded images data points gets sent back to the master thread and collected into a single structure/tensor.

<figure markdown>
![Image](../figures/cpu_data_loading3.PNG){ width="500" }
</figure>

Each arrow is corresponds to a communication between two threads, which is not a free operation. In total to get a
single batch (not counting the initial startup cost) in this example we need to do 8 communication operations. This may
seem like a small price to pay, but that may not be the case. If the processing time of ``__getitem__`` is very low (
data is stored in memory, we just need to index to get it) then it does not make sense to use multiprocessing. The
computational savings by doing the look-up operations in parallel are smaller than the communication cost there is
between the main thread and the workers. Multiprocessing makes sense when the processing time of ``__getitem__`` is high
(data is probably stored on the hard drive).

It is this trade-off that we are going to investigate in the exercises.

### ❔ Exercises

This exercise is intended to be done on the
[labeled faces in the wild (LFW)](http://vis-www.cs.umass.edu/lfw/) dataset. The dataset consists of images of famous
people extracted from the internet. The dataset had been used to drive the field of facial verification, which you can
read more about [here](https://viso.ai/deep-learning/deep-face-recognition/). We are going to imagine that this dataset
cannot fit in memory, and your job is therefore to construct a data pipeline that can be parallelized based on loading
the raw data files (.jpg) at runtime.

1. Download the dataset and extract it to a folder. It does not matter if you choose the non-aligned or aligned version
    of the dataset.

2. We provide the `lfw_dataset.py` file where we have started the process of defining a data class. Fill out the
    `__init__`, `__len__` and `__getitem__`. Note that `__getitem__` expects that you return a single `img` which should
    be a `torch.Tensor`. Loading should be done using [PIL Image](https://pillow.readthedocs.io/en/stable/), as `PIL`
    images are the default input format for [torchvision](https://pytorch.org/vision/stable/transforms.html) for
    transforms (for data augmentation).

3. Make sure that the script runs without any additional arguments

    ```bash
    python lfw_dataset.py
    ```

4. Visualize a single batch by filling out the codeblock after the first *TODO* right after defining the dataloader.
    The visualization should show when launching the script as

    ```bash
    python lfw_dataset.py -visualize_batch
    ```

    Hint: this [tutorial](https://pytorch.org/vision/stable/auto_examples/others/plot_visualization_utils.html).

5. Experiment how the number of workers influences the performance. We have already provide code that will pass over 100
    batches from the dataset 5 times and calculate how long time it took, which you can play around with by calling

    ```bash
    python lfw_dataset.py -get_timing -num_workers 1
    ```

    Make a [errorbar plot](https://matplotlib.org/stable/api/_as_gen/matplotlib.pyplot.errorbar.html) with number of
    workers along the x-axis and the timing along the y-axis. The errorbars should correspond to the standard deviation
    over the 5 runs. HINT: if it is taking too long to evaluate, measure the time over less batches (set the
    `-batches_to_check` flag). Also if you are not seeing an improvement, try increasing the batch size (since data
    loading is parallelized per batch).

    For certain machines like the Mac with M1 chipset it is necessary to set the `multiprocessing_context` flag in the
    dataloder to `"fork"`. This essentially tells the dataloader how the worker nodes should be created.

6. Retry the experiment where you change the data augmentation to be more complex:

    ```python
    lfw_trans = transforms.Compose([
        transforms.RandomAffine(5, (0.1, 0.1), (0.5, 2.0)),
        # add more transforms here
        transforms.ToTensor()
    ])
    ```

    by making the augmentation more computationally demanding, it should be easier to get a boost in performance when
    using multiple workers because the data augmentation is also executed in parallel.

7. (Optional, requires access to GPU) If your dataset fits in GPU memory it is beneficial to set the `pin_memory` flag
    to `True`. By setting this flag we are essentially telling PyTorch that they can lock the data in place in memory
    which will make the transfer between the *host* (CPU) and the *device* (GPU) faster.

This ends the module on distributed data loading in PyTorch. If you want to go into more details we highly recommend
that you read [this paper](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2211.04908.pdf) that goes into great detail on analyzing how data
loading in PyTorch works and performance benchmarks.
