s9_scalable_applications/distributed_training.md, before:

![Logo](../figures/icons/lightning.png){ align=right width="130"}

# Distributed Training

---

In this module we are going to look at distributed training. Distributed training is one of the key ingredients
to all the awesome results that deep learning models are producing. For example:
[Alphafold](https://deepmind.com/blog/article/alphafold-a-solution-to-a-50-year-old-grand-challenge-in-biology)
the highly praised model from Deepmind that seems to have solved protein structure prediction, was trained
in a distributed fashion for a few weeks. The training was done on 16 TPUv3s (specialized hardware), which
is approximately equal to 100-200 modern GPUs. This means that training Alphafold without distributed training
on a single GPU (probably not even possible) would take a couple of years to train! Therefore, it is simply
impossible currently to train some of the state-of-the-art (SOTA) models within deep learning currently,
without taking advantage of distributed training.

When we talk about distributed training, there are a number of different paradigms that we may use to parallelize
our computations

* Data parallel (DP) training
* Distributed data parallel (DDP) training
* Sharded training

In this module we are going to look at data parallel training, which is the original way of doing parallel training and
distributed data parallel training which is an improved version of data parallel. If you want to know more about sharded
training which is the newest of the paradigms you can read more about it in this
[blog post](https://towardsdatascience.com/sharded-a-new-technique-to-double-the-size-of-pytorch-models-3af057466dba),
which describes how sharded can save over 60% of memory used during your training.

Finally, we want to note that for all the exercises in the module you are going to need a multi GPU setup. If you have
not already gained access to multi GPU machines on GCP (see the quotas exercises in
[this module](../s6_the_cloud/cloud_setup.md)) you will need to find another way of running the exercises. For
DTU Students I can recommend checking out [this optional module](../s10_extra/high_performance_clusters.md) on using the
high performance cluster (HPC) where you can get access to multi GPU resources.

## Data parallel

While data parallel today in general is seen as obsolete compared to distributed data parallel, we are still
going to investigate it a bit since it offers the most simple form of distributed computations in deep learning
pipeline.

In the figure below is shown both the *forward* and *backward* step in the data parallel paradigm

<figure markdown>
![Image](../figures/data_parallel.png){ width="1000" }
</figure>

The steps are the following:

* Whenever we try to do *forward* call e.g. `out=model(batch)` we take the batch and divide it equally between all
    devices. If we have a batch size of `N` and `M` devices each device will be sent `N/M` datapoints.

* Afterwards each device receives a copy of the `model` e.g. a copy of the weights that currently parametrizes our
    neural network.

* In this step we perform the actual *forward* pass in parallel. This is the actual steps that can help us scale
    our training.

* Finally we need to send back the output of each replicated model to the primary device.

Similar to the analysis we did of parallel data loading, we cannot always expect that this will actual take less time
than doing the forward call on a single GPU. If we are parallelizing over `M` devices, we essentially need to do `3xM`
communication calls to send batch, model and output between the devices. If the parallel forward call does not outweigh
this, then it will take longer.

In addition, we also have the *backward* path to focus on

* As the end of the *forward* collected the output on the primary device, this is also where the loss is accumulated.
    Thus, loss gradients are first calculated on the primary device

* Next we scatter the gradient to all the workers

* The workers then perform a parallel backward pass through their individual model

* Finally, we reduce (sum) the gradients from all the workers on the main process such that we can do gradient descend.

One of the big downsides of using data parallel is that all the replicas are destroyed after each *backward* call.
This means that we over and over again need to replicate our model and send it to the devices that are part of the
computations.

Even though it seems like a lot of logic is implementing data parallel into your code, in Pytorch we can very simply
enable data parallel training by wrapping our model in the
[nn.DataParallel](https://pytorch.org/docs/stable/generated/torch.nn.DataParallel.html) class.

```python
from torch import nn
model = MyModelClass()
model = nn.DataParallel(model, device_ids=[0, 1])  # data parallel on gpu 0 and 1
preds = model(input)  # same as usual
```

### ❔ Exercises

Please note that the exercise only makes sense if you have access to multiple GPUs.

1. Create a new script (call it `data_parallel.py`) where you take a copy of model `FashionCNN`
    from the `fashion_mnist.py` script. Instantiate the model and wrap `torch.nn.DataParallel`
    around it such that it can be executed in data parallel.

2. Try to run inference in parallel on multiple devices (pass a batch multiple times and time it) e.g.

    ```python
    import time
    start = time.time()
    for _ in range(n_reps):
        out = model(batch)
    end = time.time()
    ```

    Does data parallel decrease the inference time? If no, can you explain why that may be? Try
    playing around with the batch size, and see if data parallel is more beneficial for larger batch sizes.

## Distributed data parallel

It should be clear that there is huge disadvantage of using the data parallel paradigm to scale your applications:
the model needs to replicated on each pass (because it is destroyed in the end), which requires a large transfer
of data. This is the main problem that distributed data parallel tries to solve.

<figure markdown>
![Image](../figures/distributed_data_parallel.png){ width="8000" }
</figure>

The two key difference between distributed data parallel and data parallel that we move the model update
(the gradient step) to happen on each device in parallel instead of only on the main device. This has the consequence
that we do not need to move replicate the model on each step, instead we just keep a local version on each device that
we keep updating. The full set of steps (as shown in the figure):

* Initialize an exact copy of the model on each device

* From disk (or memory) we start by loading data into a section of page-locked host memory per device. Page-locked
    memory is essentially a way to reverse a piece of a computers memory for a specific transfer that is going to
    happen over and over again to speed it up. The page-locked regions are loaded with non-overlapping data.

* Transfer data from page-locked memory to each device in parallel

* Perform *forward*  pass in parallel

* Do a all-reduce operation on the gradients. An all-reduce operation is a so call *all-to-all*  operation meaning
    that all processes send their own gradient to all other processes and also received from all other processes.

* Reduce the combined gradient signal from all processes and update the individual model in parallel. Since all
    processes received the same gradient information, all models will still be in sync.

Thus, in distributed data parallel we here end up only doing a single communication call between all processes, compared
to all the communication going on in data parallel. While all-reduce is a more expensive operation that many of the
other communication operations that we can do, because we only have to do a single we gain a huge performance boost.
Empirically distributed data parallel tends to be 2-3 times faster than data parallel.

However, this performance increase does not come for free. Where we could implement data parallel in a single line in
Pytorch, distributed data parallel is much more involving.

### ❔ Exercises

1. We have provided an example of how to do distributed data parallel training in Pytorch in the two
    files `distributed_example.py` and `distributed_example.sh`. You objective is to get a understanding of the necessary
    components in the script to get this kind of distributed training to work. Try to answer the following questions
    (HINT: try to Google around):

    1. What is the function of the `DDP` wrapper?

    2. What is the function of the `DistributedSampler`?

    3. Why is it necessary to call `dist.barrier()` before passing a batch into the model?

    4. What does the different environment variables do in the `.sh` file

2. Try to benchmark the runs using 1 and 2 GPUs

3. The first exercise have hopefully convinced you that it can be quite the trouble writing distributed training
    applications yourself. Luckily for us, `Pytorch-lightning` can take care of this for us such that we do not have to
    care about the specific details. To get your model training on multiple GPUs you need to change two arguments in the
    trainer: the `accelerator` flag and the `gpus` flag. In addition to this, you can read through this
    [guide](https://pytorch-lightning.readthedocs.io/en/latest/accelerators/gpu.html) about any additional steps you may
    need to do (for many of you, it should just work). Try running your model on multiple GPUs.

4. Try benchmarking your training using 1 and 2 gpus e.g. try running a couple of epochs and measure how long time it
    takes. How much of a speedup can you actually get? Why can you not get a speedup of 2?

Commit message:

Finish ML deployment module (#280)
* move files

* delete local deployment module + fix readme

* fix numbering

* move exercise files

* fix cross link

* include nice table in intro

* correct PyTorch spelling in documentation and comments

* getting started on the bento stuff

* Pre-commit fixes

* update with some images

* first bento exercise finished

* exercise on adaptive batching

* more exercises

* finish module

* fix links

---------

Co-authored-by: SkafteNicki <SkafteNicki@users.noreply.github.com>

s9_scalable_applications/distributed_training.md, after:

![Logo](../figures/icons/lightning.png){ align=right width="130"}

# Distributed Training

---

In this module we are going to look at distributed training. Distributed training is one of the key ingredients
to all the awesome results that deep learning models are producing. For example:
[Alphafold](https://deepmind.com/blog/article/alphafold-a-solution-to-a-50-year-old-grand-challenge-in-biology)
the highly praised model from Deepmind that seems to have solved protein structure prediction, was trained
in a distributed fashion for a few weeks. The training was done on 16 TPUv3s (specialized hardware), which
is approximately equal to 100-200 modern GPUs. This means that training Alphafold without distributed training
on a single GPU (probably not even possible) would take a couple of years to train! Therefore, it is simply
impossible currently to train some of the state-of-the-art (SOTA) models within deep learning currently,
without taking advantage of distributed training.

When we talk about distributed training, there are a number of different paradigms that we may use to parallelize
our computations

* Data parallel (DP) training
* Distributed data parallel (DDP) training
* Sharded training

In this module we are going to look at data parallel training, which is the original way of doing parallel training and
distributed data parallel training which is an improved version of data parallel. If you want to know more about sharded
training which is the newest of the paradigms you can read more about it in this
[blog post](https://towardsdatascience.com/sharded-a-new-technique-to-double-the-size-of-pytorch-models-3af057466dba),
which describes how sharded can save over 60% of memory used during your training.

Finally, we want to note that for all the exercises in the module you are going to need a multi GPU setup. If you have
not already gained access to multi GPU machines on GCP (see the quotas exercises in
[this module](../s6_the_cloud/cloud_setup.md)) you will need to find another way of running the exercises. For
DTU Students I can recommend checking out [this optional module](../s10_extra/high_performance_clusters.md) on using the
high performance cluster (HPC) where you can get access to multi GPU resources.

## Data parallel

While data parallel today in general is seen as obsolete compared to distributed data parallel, we are still
going to investigate it a bit since it offers the most simple form of distributed computations in deep learning
pipeline.

In the figure below is shown both the *forward* and *backward* step in the data parallel paradigm

<figure markdown>
![Image](../figures/data_parallel.png){ width="1000" }
</figure>

The steps are the following:

* Whenever we try to do *forward* call e.g. `out=model(batch)` we take the batch and divide it equally between all
    devices. If we have a batch size of `N` and `M` devices each device will be sent `N/M` datapoints.

* Afterwards each device receives a copy of the `model` e.g. a copy of the weights that currently parametrizes our
    neural network.

* In this step we perform the actual *forward* pass in parallel. This is the actual steps that can help us scale
    our training.

* Finally we need to send back the output of each replicated model to the primary device.

Similar to the analysis we did of parallel data loading, we cannot always expect that this will actual take less time
than doing the forward call on a single GPU. If we are parallelizing over `M` devices, we essentially need to do `3xM`
communication calls to send batch, model and output between the devices. If the parallel forward call does not outweigh
this, then it will take longer.

In addition, we also have the *backward* path to focus on

* As the end of the *forward* collected the output on the primary device, this is also where the loss is accumulated.
    Thus, loss gradients are first calculated on the primary device

* Next we scatter the gradient to all the workers

* The workers then perform a parallel backward pass through their individual model

* Finally, we reduce (sum) the gradients from all the workers on the main process such that we can do gradient descend.

One of the big downsides of using data parallel is that all the replicas are destroyed after each *backward* call.
This means that we over and over again need to replicate our model and send it to the devices that are part of the
computations.

Even though it seems like a lot of logic is implementing data parallel into your code, in PyTorch we can very simply
enable data parallel training by wrapping our model in the
[nn.DataParallel](https://pytorch.org/docs/stable/generated/torch.nn.DataParallel.html) class.

```python
from torch import nn
model = MyModelClass()
model = nn.DataParallel(model, device_ids=[0, 1])  # data parallel on gpu 0 and 1
preds = model(input)  # same as usual
```

### ❔ Exercises

Please note that the exercise only makes sense if you have access to multiple GPUs.

1. Create a new script (call it `data_parallel.py`) where you take a copy of model `FashionCNN`
    from the `fashion_mnist.py` script. Instantiate the model and wrap `torch.nn.DataParallel`
    around it such that it can be executed in data parallel.

2. Try to run inference in parallel on multiple devices (pass a batch multiple times and time it) e.g.

    ```python
    import time
    start = time.time()
    for _ in range(n_reps):
        out = model(batch)
    end = time.time()
    ```

    Does data parallel decrease the inference time? If no, can you explain why that may be? Try
    playing around with the batch size, and see if data parallel is more beneficial for larger batch sizes.

## Distributed data parallel

It should be clear that there is huge disadvantage of using the data parallel paradigm to scale your applications:
the model needs to replicated on each pass (because it is destroyed in the end), which requires a large transfer
of data. This is the main problem that distributed data parallel tries to solve.

<figure markdown>
![Image](../figures/distributed_data_parallel.png){ width="8000" }
</figure>

The two key difference between distributed data parallel and data parallel that we move the model update
(the gradient step) to happen on each device in parallel instead of only on the main device. This has the consequence
that we do not need to move replicate the model on each step, instead we just keep a local version on each device that
we keep updating. The full set of steps (as shown in the figure):

* Initialize an exact copy of the model on each device

* From disk (or memory) we start by loading data into a section of page-locked host memory per device. Page-locked
    memory is essentially a way to reverse a piece of a computers memory for a specific transfer that is going to
    happen over and over again to speed it up. The page-locked regions are loaded with non-overlapping data.

* Transfer data from page-locked memory to each device in parallel

* Perform *forward*  pass in parallel

* Do a all-reduce operation on the gradients. An all-reduce operation is a so call *all-to-all*  operation meaning
    that all processes send their own gradient to all other processes and also received from all other processes.

* Reduce the combined gradient signal from all processes and update the individual model in parallel. Since all
    processes received the same gradient information, all models will still be in sync.

Thus, in distributed data parallel we here end up only doing a single communication call between all processes, compared
to all the communication going on in data parallel. While all-reduce is a more expensive operation that many of the
other communication operations that we can do, because we only have to do a single we gain a huge performance boost.
Empirically distributed data parallel tends to be 2-3 times faster than data parallel.

However, this performance increase does not come for free. Where we could implement data parallel in a single line in
PyTorch, distributed data parallel is much more involving.

### ❔ Exercises

1. We have provided an example of how to do distributed data parallel training in PyTorch in the two
    files `distributed_example.py` and `distributed_example.sh`. You objective is to get a understanding of the necessary
    components in the script to get this kind of distributed training to work. Try to answer the following questions
    (HINT: try to Google around):

    1. What is the function of the `DDP` wrapper?

    2. What is the function of the `DistributedSampler`?

    3. Why is it necessary to call `dist.barrier()` before passing a batch into the model?

    4. What does the different environment variables do in the `.sh` file

2. Try to benchmark the runs using 1 and 2 GPUs

3. The first exercise have hopefully convinced you that it can be quite the trouble writing distributed training
    applications yourself. Luckily for us, `PyTorch-lightning` can take care of this for us such that we do not have to
    care about the specific details. To get your model training on multiple GPUs you need to change two arguments in the
    trainer: the `accelerator` flag and the `gpus` flag. In addition to this, you can read through this
    [guide](https://pytorch-lightning.readthedocs.io/en/latest/accelerators/gpu.html) about any additional steps you may
    need to do (for many of you, it should just work). Try running your model on multiple GPUs.

4. Try benchmarking your training using 1 and 2 gpus e.g. try running a couple of epochs and measure how long time it
    takes. How much of a speedup can you actually get? Why can you not get a speedup of 2?
