s5_continuous_integration/unittesting.md, before:

![Logo](../figures/icons/pytest.png){ align=right width="130"}

# Unit testing

---

!!! info "Core Module"

What often comes to mind for many developers, when discussing continuous integration (CI) is code testing.
CI should secure that whenever a codebase is updated it is automatically tested such that if bugs have been
introduced in the codebase it will be caught early on. If you look at the
[MLOps cyclepipeline](../figures/mlops-loop-en.jpg), CI is one of cornerstones of operations part. However, it
should be notes that applying CI does not magically secure that your code does not break. CI is only as strong as the
tests that are automatically executed. CI simply structures and automates this.

!!! quote
    *Continuous Integration doesn’t get rid of bugs, but it does make them dramatically easier to find and remove.*
    <br> <br>
    Martin Fowler, Chief Scientist, ThoughtWorks

<figure markdown>
![Image](../figures/ci.png){ width="600" }
<figcaption>
<a href="https://devhumor.com/media/tests-won-t-fail-if-you-don-t-write-tests"> Image credit </a>
</figcaption>
</figure>

The kind of tests we are going to look at are called [unit testing](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unit_testing). Unit
testing refer to the practice of writing test that tests individual parts of your code base to test for correctness. By
unit you can therefore think a function, module or in general any object. By writing tests in this way it should be
very easy to isolate which part of the code that broke after an update to the code base. Another way to test your code
base would be through [integration testing](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Integration_testing) which is equally
important but we are not going to focus on it in this course.

## Pytest

Before we can begin to automate testing of our code base we of course need to write the tests first. It is both a hard
and tedious task to do but arguable the most important aspects of CI. Python offers a couple of different libraries
for writing tests. We are going to use `pytest`.

### ❔ Exercises

The following exercises should be applied to your MNIST repository

1. The first part of doing CI is writing the unit tests. We do not expect you to cover every part
    of the code you have developed but try to at least write tests that cover two files. Start by
    creating a `tests` folder.

2. Read the [getting started guide](https://docs.pytest.org/en/6.2.x/getting-started.html) for pytest
    which is the testing framework that we are going to use

3. Install pytest:

    ```bash
    pip install pytest
    ```

4. Write some tests. Below are some guidelines on some tests that should be implemented, but
    you are of course free to implement more tests. You can at any point check if your tests are
    passing by typing in a terminal

    ```bash
    pytest tests/
    ```

    When you implement a test you need to follow two standards, for `pytest` to be able to find your tests. First any
    files created (except `__init__.py`) should always start with `test_*.py`. Secondly, any test implemented needs to be
    wrapped into its own function that again needs to start with `test_`:

    ```python
    # this will be found and executed by pytest
    def test_something():
        ...

    # this will not be found and executed by pytest
    def something_to_test():
        ...
    ```

    1. Start by creating a `tests/__init__.py` file and fill in the following:

        ```python
        import os
        _TEST_ROOT = os.path.dirname(__file__)  # root of test folder
        _PROJECT_ROOT = os.path.dirname(_TEST_ROOT)  # root of project
        _PATH_DATA = os.path.join(_PROJECT_ROOT, "Data")  # root of data
        ```

        these can help you refer to your data files during testing. For example, in another test
        file I could write

        ```python
        from tests import _PATH_DATA
        ```

        which then contains the root path to my data.

    2. Data testing: In a file called `tests/test_data.py` implement at least a test that checks that data gets
        correctly loaded. By this we mean that you should check

        ```python
        def test_data():
            dataset = MNIST(...)
            assert len(dataset) == N_train for training and N_test for test
            assert that each datapoint has shape [1,28,28] or [784] depending on how you choose to format
            assert that all labels are represented
        ```

        where `N_train` should be either 25000 or 40000 depending on if you are just the first
        subset of the corrupted MNIST data or also including the second subset. `N_test` should
        be 5000.

    3. Model testing: In a file called `tests/test_model.py` implement at least a test that
        checks for a given input with shape *X* that the output of the model have shape *Y*

    4. Training testing: In a file called `tests/test_training.py` implement at least one
        test that asserts something about your training script. You are here given free hands on
        what should be tested, but try to test something the risk being broken when developing the code.

    5. Good code raises errors and give out warnings in appropriate places. This is often in
        the case of some invalid combination of input to your script. For example, you model
        could check for the size of the input given to it (see code below) to make sure it corresponds
        to what you are expecting. Not implementing such errors would still result in Pytorch failing
        at a later point due to shape errors, however these custom errors will probably make more sense
        to the end user. Implement at least one raised error or warning somewhere in your code and
        use either `pytest.raises` or `pytest.warns` to check that they are correctly raised/warned.
        As inspiration, the following implements `ValueError` in code belonging to the model:

        ```python
        # src/models/model.py
        def forward(self, x: Tensor):
            if x.ndim != 4:
                raise ValueError('Expected input to a 4D tensor')
            if x.shape[1] != 1 or x.shape[2] != 28 or x.shape[3] != 28:
                raise ValueError('Expected each sample to have shape [1, 28, 28]')
        ```

        which would be captured by a test looking something like this:

        ```python
        # tests/test_model.py
        def test_error_on_wrong_shape():
            with pytest.raises(ValueError, match='Expected input to a 4D tensor')
                model(torch.randn(1,2,3))
        ```

    6. A test is only as good as the error message it gives, and by default `assert`
        will only report that the check failed. However, we can help our self and others by adding
        strings after `assert` like

        ```python
        assert len(train_dataset) == N_train, "Dataset did not have the correct number of samples"
        ```

        Add such comments to the assert statements you just did.

    7. The tests that involve checking anything that have to do with our data, will of course fail
        if the data is not present. To future proof our code, we can take advantage of the
        `pytest.mark.skipif` decorator. Use this decorator to skip your data tests if the corresponding
        data files does not exist. It should look something like this

        ```python
        import os.path
        @pytest.mark.skipif(not os.path.exists(file_path), reason="Data files not found")
        def test_something_about_data():
            ...
        ```

        You can read more about skipping tests [here](https://docs.pytest.org/en/latest/how-to/skipping.html)

5. After writing the different tests, make sure that they are passing locally.

6. We often want to check a function/module for various input arguments. In this case you could
    write the same test over and over again for the different input, but `pytest` also have build
    in support for this with the use of the
    [pytest.mark.parametrize decorator](https://docs.pytest.org/en/6.2.x/parametrize.html).
    Implement a parametrize test and make sure that it runs for different input.

7. There really do not exist any way of measuring how good the test you have written are. However,
    what we can measure is the *code coverage*. Code coverage refers to the percentage of your
    codebase that actually gets run when all your tests are executed. Having a high coverage
    at least means that all your code will run when executed.

    1. Install coverage

        ```bash
        pip install coverage
        ```

    2. Instead of running your tests directly with `pytest`, now do

        ```bash
        coverage run -m pytest tests/
        ```

    3. To get a simple coverage report simply type

        ```bash
        coverage report
        ```

        which will give you the percentage of cover in each of your files. You can also write

        ```bash
        coverage report -m
        ```

        to get the exact lines that was missed by your tests.

    4. Finally, try to increase the coverage by writing a new test that runs some
        of the lines in your codebase that is not covered yet.

    5. Often `coverage` reports the code coverage on files that we actually do not want
        to get a code coverage for. Figure out how to configure `coverage` to exclude
        some files.

## 🧠 Knowledge check

??? question "Knowledge question 1"

    Assume you have a code coverage of 100%, would you expect that no bugs are present in your code?

    ??? success "Solution"

        No, code coverage is not a guarantee that your code is bug free. It is just a measure of how much many lines
        of code that are actually run when your tests are executed. It is that there is some corner case that is not
        covered by your tests and will result in a bug. However, having a high code coverage is a good indicator that
        you actually have tested your code.

That covers the basic of writing unittests for python code. We want to note that `pytest` of course is not the only
framework for doing this. Python actually have an build in framework called
[unittest](https://docs.python.org/3/library/unittest.html) for doing this also (but `pytest` offers a bit more
features). Another open-source framework that you could choose to checkout is
[hypothesis](https://github.com/HypothesisWorks/hypothesis) that can really help catch errors in corner cases of your
code. In addition to writing unittests it is also highly recommended to test code that you include in your
docstring belonging to your functions and modulus to make sure that any code there is in your documentation is also
correct. For such testing we can highly recommend using pythons built-in framework
[doctest](https://docs.python.org/3/library/doctest.html).

Commit message:

Code structure update (#192)
* introduce pyproject

* annotations

* add optional exercise on apis testing

* small updates to modules

* update good coding practice to use ruff

* update pre-commit and action to use ruff

* ruff in pre-commit

* annotation in command line

* code structure

* update code structure

* update actions to ruff

* fixes

* fixes

---------

Co-authored-by: Nicki Skafte Detlefsen <nsde@dtu.dk>

s5_continuous_integration/unittesting.md, after:

![Logo](../figures/icons/pytest.png){ align=right width="130"}

# Unit testing

---

!!! info "Core Module"

What often comes to mind for many developers, when discussing continuous integration (CI) is code testing.
CI should secure that whenever a codebase is updated it is automatically tested such that if bugs have been
introduced in the codebase it will be caught early on. If you look at the
[MLOps cyclepipeline](../figures/mlops-loop-en.jpg), CI is one of cornerstones of operations part. However, it
should be notes that applying CI does not magically secure that your code does not break. CI is only as strong as the
tests that are automatically executed. CI simply structures and automates this.

!!! quote
    *Continuous Integration doesn’t get rid of bugs, but it does make them dramatically easier to find and remove.*
    <br> <br>
    Martin Fowler, Chief Scientist, ThoughtWorks

<figure markdown>
![Image](../figures/ci.png){ width="600" }
<figcaption>
<a href="https://devhumor.com/media/tests-won-t-fail-if-you-don-t-write-tests"> Image credit </a>
</figcaption>
</figure>

The kind of tests we are going to look at are called [unit testing](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unit_testing). Unit
testing refer to the practice of writing test that tests individual parts of your code base to test for correctness. By
unit you can therefore think a function, module or in general any object. By writing tests in this way it should be
very easy to isolate which part of the code that broke after an update to the code base. Another way to test your code
base would be through [integration testing](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Integration_testing) which is equally
important but we are not going to focus on it in this course.

Unittests (and integration tests) are not a unique concept to MLOps, but is a core concept from DevOps. However, it is
important to note that testing of machine learning based system are much more difficult than traditional systems. The
reason for this is that machine learning systems depends on *data*, that influences the state of our system. For this
reason, we not only need unittests and integration tests of our code, we also need data testing, infrastructure testing
and more monitoring to check that we stay within the data distribution we are training on (more on this in
[module M25 on data drifting](../s8_monitoring/data_drifting.md)). This added complexity is illustrated in the figure
below.

<figure markdown>
  ![Image](../figures/system_difference.drawio.png){ width="1000" }
</figure>

## Pytest

Before we can begin to automate testing of our code base we of course need to write the tests first. It is both a hard
and tedious task to do but arguable the most important aspects of CI. Python offers a couple of different libraries
for writing tests. We are going to use `pytest`.

### ❔ Exercises

The following exercises should be applied to your MNIST repository

1. The first part of doing CI is writing the unit tests. We do not expect you to cover every part
    of the code you have developed but try to at least write tests that cover two files. Start by
    creating a `tests` folder.

2. Read the [getting started guide](https://docs.pytest.org/en/6.2.x/getting-started.html) for pytest
    which is the testing framework that we are going to use

3. Install pytest:

    ```bash
    pip install pytest
    ```

4. Write some tests. Below are some guidelines on some tests that should be implemented, but
    you are of course free to implement more tests. You can at any point check if your tests are
    passing by typing in a terminal

    ```bash
    pytest tests/
    ```

    When you implement a test you need to follow two standards, for `pytest` to be able to find your tests. First any
    files created (except `__init__.py`) should always start with `test_*.py`. Secondly, any test implemented needs to be
    wrapped into its own function that again needs to start with `test_`:

    ```python
    # this will be found and executed by pytest
    def test_something():
        ...

    # this will not be found and executed by pytest
    def something_to_test():
        ...
    ```

    1. Start by creating a `tests/__init__.py` file and fill in the following:

        ```python
        import os
        _TEST_ROOT = os.path.dirname(__file__)  # root of test folder
        _PROJECT_ROOT = os.path.dirname(_TEST_ROOT)  # root of project
        _PATH_DATA = os.path.join(_PROJECT_ROOT, "Data")  # root of data
        ```

        these can help you refer to your data files during testing. For example, in another test
        file I could write

        ```python
        from tests import _PATH_DATA
        ```

        which then contains the root path to my data.

    2. Data testing: In a file called `tests/test_data.py` implement at least a test that checks that data gets
        correctly loaded. By this we mean that you should check

        ```python
        def test_data():
            dataset = MNIST(...)
            assert len(dataset) == N_train for training and N_test for test
            assert that each datapoint has shape [1,28,28] or [784] depending on how you choose to format
            assert that all labels are represented
        ```

        where `N_train` should be either 25000 or 40000 depending on if you are just the first
        subset of the corrupted MNIST data or also including the second subset. `N_test` should
        be 5000.

    3. Model testing: In a file called `tests/test_model.py` implement at least a test that
        checks for a given input with shape *X* that the output of the model have shape *Y*

    4. Training testing: In a file called `tests/test_training.py` implement at least one
        test that asserts something about your training script. You are here given free hands on
        what should be tested, but try to test something the risk being broken when developing the code.

    5. Good code raises errors and give out warnings in appropriate places. This is often in
        the case of some invalid combination of input to your script. For example, you model
        could check for the size of the input given to it (see code below) to make sure it corresponds
        to what you are expecting. Not implementing such errors would still result in Pytorch failing
        at a later point due to shape errors, however these custom errors will probably make more sense
        to the end user. Implement at least one raised error or warning somewhere in your code and
        use either `pytest.raises` or `pytest.warns` to check that they are correctly raised/warned.
        As inspiration, the following implements `ValueError` in code belonging to the model:

        ```python
        # src/models/model.py
        def forward(self, x: Tensor):
            if x.ndim != 4:
                raise ValueError('Expected input to a 4D tensor')
            if x.shape[1] != 1 or x.shape[2] != 28 or x.shape[3] != 28:
                raise ValueError('Expected each sample to have shape [1, 28, 28]')
        ```

        which would be captured by a test looking something like this:

        ```python
        # tests/test_model.py
        def test_error_on_wrong_shape():
            with pytest.raises(ValueError, match='Expected input to a 4D tensor')
                model(torch.randn(1,2,3))
        ```

    6. A test is only as good as the error message it gives, and by default `assert`
        will only report that the check failed. However, we can help our self and others by adding
        strings after `assert` like

        ```python
        assert len(train_dataset) == N_train, "Dataset did not have the correct number of samples"
        ```

        Add such comments to the assert statements you just did.

    7. The tests that involve checking anything that have to do with our data, will of course fail
        if the data is not present. To future proof our code, we can take advantage of the
        `pytest.mark.skipif` decorator. Use this decorator to skip your data tests if the corresponding
        data files does not exist. It should look something like this

        ```python
        import os.path
        @pytest.mark.skipif(not os.path.exists(file_path), reason="Data files not found")
        def test_something_about_data():
            ...
        ```

        You can read more about skipping tests [here](https://docs.pytest.org/en/latest/how-to/skipping.html)

5. After writing the different tests, make sure that they are passing locally.

6. We often want to check a function/module for various input arguments. In this case you could
    write the same test over and over again for the different input, but `pytest` also have build
    in support for this with the use of the
    [pytest.mark.parametrize decorator](https://docs.pytest.org/en/6.2.x/parametrize.html).
    Implement a parametrize test and make sure that it runs for different input.

7. There really do not exist any way of measuring how good the test you have written are. However,
    what we can measure is the *code coverage*. Code coverage refers to the percentage of your
    codebase that actually gets run when all your tests are executed. Having a high coverage
    at least means that all your code will run when executed.

    1. Install coverage

        ```bash
        pip install coverage
        ```

    2. Instead of running your tests directly with `pytest`, now do

        ```bash
        coverage run -m pytest tests/
        ```

    3. To get a simple coverage report simply type

        ```bash
        coverage report
        ```

        which will give you the percentage of cover in each of your files. You can also write

        ```bash
        coverage report -m
        ```

        to get the exact lines that was missed by your tests.

    4. Finally, try to increase the coverage by writing a new test that runs some
        of the lines in your codebase that is not covered yet.

    5. Often `coverage` reports the code coverage on files that we actually do not want
        to get a code coverage for. Figure out how to configure `coverage` to exclude
        some files.

### 🧠 Knowledge check

??? question "Knowledge question 1"

    Assume you have a code coverage of 100%, would you expect that no bugs are present in your code?

    ??? success "Solution"

        No, code coverage is not a guarantee that your code is bug free. It is just a measure of how much many lines
        of code that are actually run when your tests are executed. It is that there is some corner case that is not
        covered by your tests and will result in a bug. However, having a high code coverage is a good indicator that
        you actually have tested your code.

That covers the basic of writing unittests for python code. We want to note that `pytest` of course is not the only
framework for doing this. Python actually have an build in framework called
[unittest](https://docs.python.org/3/library/unittest.html) for doing this also (but `pytest` offers a bit more
features). Another open-source framework that you could choose to checkout is
[hypothesis](https://github.com/HypothesisWorks/hypothesis) that can really help catch errors in corner cases of your
code. In addition to writing unittests it is also highly recommended to test code that you include in your
docstring belonging to your functions and modulus to make sure that any code there is in your documentation is also
correct. For such testing we can highly recommend using pythons built-in framework
[doctest](https://docs.python.org/3/library/doctest.html).
